any Williams Presidency fun things?
Things where everybody had a good laugh?
Jokes?
Well, there was a lot of that going on.
I mean, I don't remember any of the meetings being all tight and sterile.
Do you remember anything in the office where everybody had a good laugh?
A couple times.
I'm not sure Dr. Williams was aware of it.
We got Cooper one time.
Cooper came back after, well it must have been a year or so later because Kent was already gone and Roger was there.
And Cooper came in in his usual fashion into my office and
Oh, you want something to drink?
Yeah, bring me a bourbon.
Oh, sure, sure.
So I asked Hillary to bring him a cup of coffee.
Those were the days when secretaries brought you coffee and all.
And so Roger had just gotten back some trip and brought one of the little bottles of bourbon off the airplane.
So they poured it in the coffee cup and brought it in.
And Cooper thought he was getting a cup of coffee and he got a cup of bourbon until he took a sip.
So we got a laugh out of that.
But I don't remember any.
What about, do you remember any events of race or ethnicity or sex during Williams?
How did he feel about, do you remember any problems over women or blacks or anybody else?
No, no, no.
I don't remember any.
All right, and you left the office to go back to physics then.
Yes.
And what was your new task?
Well, as I said earlier, I really enjoyed the secretary of the academic council, and so I went to Dr. Williams and told him it was time for me to go back to physics.
I would like very much to continue on and help him in that area if he wanted me to.
I could continue to be secretary of the academic council.
Of course, I was a bit devious there.
I did enjoy that and I did want to continue in that job, but I also wanted a secretary.
And because I had the secretary situation back in physics was a mess.
And I had a lot of research going on in those days.
And I was writing proposals and publishing papers and those things.
And my secretary there in the president's office did all that work for me.
And now I was going to go back into physics and have to just join in with the secretary of pool.
And so I told Dr. Williams that I'd like to do that, and I'd be willing to do that, but I'd need to set up an office, and I'd need a part-time secretary.
And so he agreed and said, fine, fine, see Dr. Calhoun, tell him you need to.
I need all this.
Dr. Calhoun, I mean, he's always been a real supporter of most anything I did and always helped whenever.
And so he said, yeah, yeah.
So Dr. Calhoun set up a budget for me
to have a half-time secretary pay, I think my salary was paid 25 percent from Dr. Calhoun's account.
So I stayed in that job then until the Faculty Senate came.
And you continued.
During your service in the president's office, you continued to do research?
Yes.
No, I didn't.
But you weren't teaching?
No, no, I was teaching.
Oh, you were teaching?
I never missed a semester teaching until two years ago, and I hired a, the first
female to ever be a full-time faculty member, tenure track faculty member, the physics department, Russian lady.
I sent her an offer on December 15th, and I said, well, she'll never get here before mid-semester or something in the spring.
I'll teach a course, and when she gets here, I'll let her teach it.
She was there January 15th ready to teach.
So how she got through the bureaucracy of Russia and the United States and they're ready to teach, I have no idea.
So I didn't teach that semester.
That's the first semester of teaching I have missed until now and now I have routinely not been, well last year and this year I didn't teach in the fall semester.
Other than that I've always taught and I,
I taught the whole time I was in dean's office, president's office, and I've always been one to push for administrators to teach.
Why do you feel that way?
I'm in total agreement with you.
To keep you and keep them in contact with the real purpose of the university and talking to the students and then they're going to have to interact with faculty if they're teaching.
You know Frank wanted to teach and the board wouldn't let him.
Really?
In my two campus CEO tasks, I told them I would not accept it unless.
And they said in both cases, well, we won't give you extra salary.
And I said, no, I get paid for that.
And I think that that would be a very healthy.
All right.
Looking back now over a third of a century,
How have the students here at Texas A&M changed in that?
I'm not sure I want this on tape.
I am frustrated by the students of today.
They don't want to work.
I think that's a problem in the College of Science because the students can go into less demanding areas and go out and make a lot more money than can the sciences.
And so we don't get the students coming into the sciences, physics in particular.
Okay.
somehow got to handle that problem down the road because we do live in a technical world that's going to get more technical.
And I don't know how the country's going to solve that.
The graduate students in physics within the past year and a half have completely changed.
Whereas we used to get this is going to represent the United States citizen graduate student in physics, this is a foreign.
They've now crossed.
In physics across the country, there are more international students in physics graduate school than there are American students in graduate school.
And if the trend continues, they're going to
And I think that it's a sign of the times that people don't want to work.
Our graduate students don't work the way they did years ago.
And our graduate students, it's pretty much an eight-hour day and weekends off.
And I'm assuming this is not a unique day and end.
Oh, no.
I'm sure not.
But that's not the question.
The question has to do, I think, mostly with the undergraduate students.
And I am frustrated with our admissions policy.
I would much rather open the front door wider and open the back door wider.
I would like to let these kids in here and find out who wants to work and who doesn't want to work.
And it doesn't really correlate with their SAT scores.
And then after one year, if they haven't dug in and worked, then I'd like to fail them out.
And I find it very frustrating that we have kids out there who want to work but they can't get in this university.
And the ones who do come in are here and they're not here to work.
Now they may be much brighter kids than I was getting in the classroom 15 years ago, but they don't work like they did 15 years ago.
And that to me is very, very frustrating.
I teach a course, you were asking about what I taught early on, but now I'm teaching a course that is a third semester course for engineering students, mostly electrical engineering students.
Until five years ago, I never failed anybody.
I shouldn't say it that way.
Nobody ever failed if they took my class.
I've never failed anybody in my life.
But if a kid came in and stayed with me and took all the exams, did all the homework, that kid finished the course with a passing grade.
It's not the case now.
They come in and they don't want to work.
So they come into the exam and they fail it.
Why they bothered to come back for the second and third exams, I have not a clue, because they don't change.
They don't take that as a sign they've got to go to work.
And so, at the end of the semester, I failed 10 percent or so of the class, whereas 15 years ago, I never failed anybody.
Yeah.
Today, when they, as far as you're aware, when they arrive on the campus, are they better prepared in general than they were 25 years ago?
In words, they have the capability?
I suspect they are.
I don't really know, but I suspect they are.
I don't think they came in better prepared 15 years ago, except that 15 years ago, all of society was not this soft, and the big money wasn't out there for the easy taking.
Now, and that big money is particularly the explanation for the decline in American national graduate students.
They didn't get a good job right out of their undergraduate days.
Well, maybe some of that, but more of that is they don't have to work as hard.
They can go into,
business, they can go into, I mean a business college, not into business themselves, but they can go to the business college.
They're bright kids, good grades, they can get in.
And you don't have to work as hard in, I don't think it's my prejudice saying that, but you can make your grades in a general business course or an accounting course.
But it takes a lot of work to
make good grades in advanced physics courses, but I'm not, I mean, the lower level courses.
I think that my kids, when I get them third semester physics, some of them have never had to think.
They just have not.
They really, some of them want to work, but they're, some of them, those who want to work, some of them don't know how.
They've never had to really work.
They've never had to really analyze something.
If they've worked a problem, and I give them a problem similar to that on the exam, fine.
But if you change it up to where there's some logic between this one and this one, they're lost.
They're lost.
You can probably see most of the problem if you go around to some of these beer halls on Thursday night, because the weekend starts on Thursdays.
Thursday night's a big party night, and then, of course, the weekends you don't want to work, and then Sunday, you know, you're going to party some and go swimming and something, and then Monday, you're about to start thinking about there's something to do, but now you've got to go to class again, and there's new material.
So, it's a sign of the time.
So, I suspect the students we're bringing in are whiter than they were 15, 20, 30 years ago.
I suspect they are.
And they're not as determined.
But economically, they're more nearly from middle class.
They're not as?
Yeah.
I think they're certainly better off than they were financially.
The families are better off than they were.
I mean, we're living in booming times.
All right.
In the quarter century, you've been back in the department.
How has the department, what areas of emphasis, growth described the department during that quarter century?
Well, the department has gone up and come back down.
If you look at the numbers, we peaked out six, seven years ago with 46 faculty members.
We're down to 36 or 37 now.
We peaked out at 155 or 60 graduate students.
We're down to 100 now.
Our undergraduate program is very small now.
110, 120 undergraduate students
10 years ago.
We're down to maybe 50.
I think it's the same thing.
Nobody wanted to work that hard to... Is that nationally?
Yeah.
And this crossover I'm telling you about for the international students in graduate school, that's certainly here and national.
The undergraduate student body is across the country down in physics, probably in all the
I haven't paid much attention to the other technical areas, but physics is down.
We took the big boost from the Sputnik days and had the heydays of science all through all of the moon stuff, which had nothing to do with science, but still everybody thought it did, so it was booming times for science.
Numbers are down.
Faculty numbers are down.
We have four strong areas in the department.
Yeah, describe those.
We have nuclear physics, which is centered around the cyclotron next door.
And we have a strong, strong group there, one of the strongest in the country.
There are not very many in the country with accelerators on campus.
We have a high-energy physics group, theory and experiment.
Our experimental group has work going on all over the world.
We have work going on at Fermi Lab.
We have work going on in Grand Sasso in Italy.
We have work going on at CERN.
Switzerland, and we have an exceptional group of high-energy theorists.
Lost our big gun or one of the big guns last year to Michigan, but we have a condensed matter group that
It is quite strong, aging, but strong.
We have an atomic group that is really booming.
It's lots of laser work, laser development, as well as using lasers in the research.
We have very strong experimental group, very strong theory group.
Fry, who I'll be talking about on Friday, is in the atomic experimental group.
Are there any areas that, in hindsight, that the department should have emphasized more than there has?
Yes, in my opinion.
I think we missed the boat to some extent 15 years ago when the Texas electronics industry was booming.
I think we would have been better served to have gone into condensed matter in a strong way.
Instead, we went to high energy physics, which was the choice of the Department at the time.
I think we would be better off now if we had gone that direction, built some alliances with Texas Instrument and the Dallas complex.
We lost a faculty member to that area because he felt the same way and finally built his own ties to Texas Instrument and then he resigned here and took a position at Tarleton, not Tarleton, Arlington, so he could be in the Dallas
area, and he still has strong ties going with Texas Instrument, and he's building a program there.
Even though that's a school much weaker than we are, but for him the location was important.
Who are the other truly big league physics departments in a three or five?
The University of Texas certainly is a renowned physics department.
Rice, to some extent, but has lost some in recent years.
Other than that, you've got to go quite a distance.
Where, Georgia Tech?
Tulane?
No, but Cornell, Stanford, Penn State.
Have we been ranked in the recent rankings?
Physics.
Oh, 30th, 40th, somewhere in there probably.
We've got lots of talk about getting in the top 20.
What would it take?
Oh, lots of money, which is hard to get out of this administration for physics right now.
You read the 2020, it doesn't have much in there for physics.
I have a committee going now that's
supposed to be plotting the future of the department.
I've stepped down.
I don't know if I mentioned that to you.
No, I didn't.
Yeah.
I told the dean, I told the faculty that it was time for us to get a new department head.
I'll give you some history of how I got in this job.
So you came back to the department in what year?
I came back in 75.
And you became department head when?
Well, in 75 Gil Ploss was department head and I was in the department and then
A decision was made.
Prescott decided to make a change in department head in physics, formed a search committee.
I chaired that search committee.
After a search, we didn't come up with anybody, and so Prescott named me interim head.
So I followed Gil Ploss in, but I was an interim head.
supposedly be in for a year.
I wound up staying in two years.
And then we still didn't find anybody from the outside, so we named Bob Tribble Department Head.
And Tribble was Department Head for eight or nine years.
And then we had a semi-search for Department Head, and Fackler, in my opinion, caved in, didn't want to
worked that hard, so he just named one of the internal people department head.
That was Dick Ornewitt.
What's his name?
Ornewitt, A-R-N-O-W-I-T-T.
And Ornewitt was department head for
eight or nine years, and dictatorial type person who did nothing for anybody except high energy.
Salaries were way out of line.
Lots and lots of tension in the department, feuding, and so with the new dean, Dick Ewing, first thing he did was to make a decision to replace Dick Arnwick.
at least I think he did, the first thing he did when he came in was to ask me to chair a committee to do an evaluation
of Dick Arnewitt, as is called for in the Rules and Regulations of the University.
I told Ewing, working through Mike Kemp in those days, I told Mike that he had to go and tell Ewing, who wasn't yet on campus, that I would chair the committee, but he had to understand that I thought that Dick Arnewitt was the worst administrator on campus who had ever been on campus.
and that I would chair the committee and try to be fair, but I couldn't guarantee complete objectivity and that they might be better served by finding somebody else to chair the committee.
Well, they decided they wanted me to chair it anyhow.
Dick Ewing called Dick Ornewitt over to tell him that he had named a committee or was getting ready to ask the faculty to name a committee to do the evaluation.
Dick Ornewitt came back over to the faculty and asked the associate department head to call a faculty meeting that he would not attend and to tell the faculty that he needed some help in his fight against the dean and he needed devoted confidence.
In my opinion, that was to go back to the dean and say, see, I have a vote of compass.
You don't need to evaluate me.
I think Ewing had already made up his mind he was going to replace him, but he wanted to have an evaluation to confirm what he was thinking.
So I chaired that committee, which was a real, the worst semester I've spent at Texas A&M was that semester.
But finally,
The decision was made, evaluation was in, most of the faculty was wanted to change.
And so Ewing wrote him a letter that he was out as of January 5th, be replaced by Bob Webb.
And so on January 5th, Bob Webb came down here to occupy the department head's office.
And Arnold wouldn't leave the office.
And didn't I tell the story the other day?
And so he just stayed there, and Webb said, Dick, we can help you pack up your things.
No response.
I went off to an NCAA meeting with Mobley.
So I came back on Tuesday of that week and called in, and the thing was still going on.
Bob Webb had set up office in the conference room, running the department.
And Arnold wouldn't leave the office.
And so I went back and sat down by Mobley and said, Mr. President, I'd like to tell you what's going on on your campus.
The old physics department head is refusing to leave the office.
The new department head has the office under siege.
I'll keep you posted.
On Friday, Dick Ardoin went off to a physics meeting, and Bob Webb had the shop people come up, pack up his things, and move him out of the office.
Bob Webb lasted as interim department head for a year and a half, I guess.
And then he, the attention was still here for the faculty's salaries.
And he went in front of the faculty and told them that nobody had received a raise except A, B, C, and D. The next morning, we had a Xerox copy of the budget in our mailboxes.
The faculty member had gone to the library showing that one of
the controversial people had received a 10% pay raise.
And that day Bob Webb resigned.
And so we had a few weeks, months search for internal person to be interim department head and I was that person.
So I was voted in to take the interim job.
So I took the job and for two years I was the interim department head.
And that's when?
Oh, starting in
So then I became permanent head in 96, I guess.
All right.
As department head, what were your philosophical guidelines for what the role of the permanent head was?
Well, mine were fairly narrow because of the times
we had going on.
First of all it was important to get an outside evaluation committee to come in and do an evaluation and we did that while I was interim head.
And the other part of my
job was to cool the temperature of the department down because everybody was at everybody's throat.
And so I came in with the goal of calming the place down and getting us ready for department head.
And so that's what I did as an interim head.
And then we had the evaluation committee come in, and I was the first one to testify in front of the evaluation committee, and I told them that there was no member of this faculty who should be department head.
that we had to go outside and bring in a department head from outside who could bring this department together and carry us into the future.
And they completely ignored that advice and at the end of their report they recommended to the dean that we hire internal because we'd been in an interim situation for four years and we should get that over with and we should name someone permanent head.
And so at that time I made a decision that, well, I certainly didn't think anybody here, including me, should be the department head, and that since the committee recommended to the dean, and the dean was going to take that recommendation and name somebody head from internal, that I was the only one that I thought should do the job.
And so I, there were four of us who ran, and the vote went my way, and so the dean appointed me the department head, and I agreed to a one four-year term.
And so this is my fourth year.
As the title department head, did you feel that your role was to make decisions
whether they were democratically the most popular or not.
Were you the chairman?
No.
I'm chairman.
I'm a chairman.
Are you bound by the department's?
I'm not bound.
I'm not bound, but I take it as strong recommendation.
Okay.
And I've done that because of the prior administration.
Involving nobody in decisions, having committees that thought they were doing things, but there was one year that the salary increases were already over in the dean's office.
The committee over here was still working on them, but the faculty didn't know they were in the dean's office.
I knew they were in the dean's office, but nobody else knew they were over there.
And so a lot of it was suffrage, and so it was my intent
to come in as a chair and salary increases have been handled as a chair.
I have a raise committee.
Each year I have held out some of the money.
When I first came into the job I held out 25-30% of the money.
and the committee made recommendations that became salary increases.
The other change I made was that salary increases are not given on percentage of present salary, but are given on increments of money, which favors the lower paid faculty at the expense of the higher paid faculty.
But there were inequities in salaries.
We had faculty members here whose only sin was they had been at Texas A&M, making far less than those who had come in more recently.
And so the first thing I did in the job as interim head was to give a raise to 12 of our old-time faculty members.
And those raises were mid-year raises and averaged some 6% or so, and that was my first step.
And then every year, up until about this year, I've taken out a diminishing percentage of salaries to address inequities as I saw them.
Other than that, the committee makes recommendations that I use to then make salary increases, so I've been a chairman.
making some decisions, but mostly I took it as my job to get the morale of the faculty back up, to get the faculty where they could work together to find a department head
that I hope would be still from outside who would come back in and come in here and give us the leadership we need.
I don't think that I'm the leader to do these things.
What indications have you found that cause you to be optimistic about the success of the way you try to do it?
I think we're certainly working more together now.
Of course, the real test is coming now because we now are being forced to write up a long-range plan, and we're being forced to come to some decisions about a new department head that I hope we are now
far enough along in the healing process that we can do in a good fashion.
And the test will be to see how we get through this.
If we get through this reasonably well and coherently and choose a new department head, then I'll feel that I've been successful in what I set out to do.
In your task as a physicist, be it a department head or just faculty, what have been some of your highest moments, most satisfying moments?
Well, with the students certainly, seeing the students who do develop my favorite story, I'll tell you.
I had a young man in class probably 12 years ago.
I've lost track.
And I tell this story about how I arrived in physics, and I tell it not only just because I